"a perfect Babel of voices": Broadcast Regulation, Amateur Advocacy, and Technocracy

======================================================

cuts

-------

(use at all? so contrary to other elements in the intro…  maybe use in next, contribs to radio history section)

In a move that is perhaps unexpected for a technofuturist like Gernsback, he frequently tempers what he saw as a boosterish fervor over the rapid development of new technologies.  By 1927, radio was firmly cemented in American life as an everyday piece of household furniture.  Not only were radios rapidly spreading into homes across the country after the so-called "radio Christmas" of 1924, but the legislative frameworks that would determine the structure of American broadcasting were finally being hammered out.^["More than ten times the number of tube sets were manufactured in 1925 than just two years earlier, and four times as many speakers as in 1923."  @douglas_listening_1999, 78].  Despite this seemingly overnight explosion, Gernsback writes in 1927, “there have not been any revolutionary improvements in radio and it is likely there will not be any."  Instead, people should expect a long process of gradual refinement:

> It is this process of slow evolution that we may expect in the future, as well, and the old adage also holds true in radio: "Natura non facit saltum"---which, translated, says that Nature does not make jumps.  In other words, all developments are part of a slow-moving plan of evolution.  Even revolutionary inventions, when they do come along, will be found in the end to be not half as great a departure as they were thought to be at first.^[@gernsback_coming_1926.]

What Gernsback could do, however, was read current inventions in light of their not so distant precursors, profiling forgotten (and often quirky) paths not taken in the development of emerging media.  In many of his editorials, the history of media is evoked not merely as a nostalgic trip back to the devices of yesteryear, but as an archive of possibilities ripe for future experimentation. For instance, in another 1927 editorial, at a moment when national broadcast networks were flickering to life and music and variety programs were flooding the country, the medium of radio had become a fixed idea in people's minds that papered over the inherent abilities of the underlying technology. Looking back on that strange trajectory in which the technology underlying wireless telegraphy became "radio," an everyday part of household furniture, Gernsback writes, "the public at large is not aware of the fact that the art of radio is used for hundreds of different purposes aside from broadcasting and telegraphy. . . .  There is hardly any industry today that cannot make use of radio instruments in some phase of its work."^[@gernsback_radio_1927.]  His examples range from a force-field like burglar alarm, to automating the recording of lightning strikes, from measuring the minute weight and touch of a fly to scanning factory workers for stolen metals.  And, in a forgotten example of Gernsback's own from the 1900s (which he christened **The Dynamophone**) electric motors can be started remotely by the human voice, proving that "the apparatus foreshadowed broadcasting: the human voice actually did create effects at the receiving end," both for machines and humans.  Gernsback consistently reminds us that the inherent abilities of wireless, of information transmitted through the air, has now itself been scattered by the winds of technological evolution and inflects our understanding of and interaction with a fantastic number of techniques, technologies, and media.  This wasn't just a historiographical move.  In articles like **New Radio 'Things' Wanted,** Gernsback encouraged home experimenters to remix and retrofit old technologies in order to imagine what the next great advance in radio might look like.  Pieces like this both educated an expanding public on precisely how this technology worked, as well as sought out new paths forward that may have been overlooked.

(Consider the heritage of this approach to media and speculative thought.  In many ways, media theory has always involved a kind of science fictional spirit, a willingness to think the present state of technosocial realities differently.  The historical collection of essays from the 1980s and 90s *Ars Electronica: Facing the Future* ed. Druckrey is exemplary in this repsect.

If not in a positivist, technoutopian vein, then at least with an openness to the future.)

populism / community

------------------------------

Eric Drown sees HG as a modernist and a progressive:

> Gernsback melded his own version of middle-class progressivism with a grass-roots liberal republican techno-utopianism he found among the amateur radio operators and home electrical experimenters to whom he sold apparatus, supplies, and a compelling view of the world.  As an immigrant bearing no professional credentials himself, Gernsback could not wear the mantle of progressive reform without making significant alterations in it.  First, while he believed in the usefulness of a formal technical education, he also gave considerable weight to innate talent and hard work.  Successful inventors like Thomas Edison and Lee de Forest were possessed of innate abilities that could not be taught in schools.  In such men talent combined with dedication to produce visionaries far superior to the products of universities, engineering schools, training programs, or correspondence courses.  …  progressive reform sought to integrate Americans with the new realities: corporate capitalism, mass culture, and expert government.  For Gernsback, these new realities were a mixed blessing.  He was an entrepreneur, competing increasingly with corporations, his business was impacted by government regulation, and in danger of being left behind by national broadcasting chains established through co-operation between the Department of Commerce, General Electric, Westinghouse, and AT&T.  As long as he credibly could, he insisted on the autonomy of the entrepreneur.  …  Promoting the notion that social progress would follow on the heels of the technological innovations produced by visionary men of genius, Gernsback’s electric futurism was a variation on progressive thought.  Still, Gernsback was offering technically-minded men an autonomy they would rarely if ever achieve.  He focused them on the glories of the entrepreneurial life even while machines put them out of work and raised the entrance costs to capitalist competition.  Though the future would belong not to the men Gernsback’s magazines tried to produce, but to the organizations that shaped them and American culture to organizational needs, his vision of the amateur inventor compensated readers with a vision of themselves as men capable of shaping their own future.  (81-2, 84) 

Ross:

> At the core of the Gernsback formula, however, was a populist principle that science could be explained and understood by everyone, and that its name would not be associated with exclusive rhetorical idioms or with obfuscatory accounts of the object world by overaccredited experts.  For Gernsback, scientific language was a universal language of progress that ought to be accessible even to those without a college degree.^[@ross_strange_1991, p. 111.]