"certain future instrumentalities”: The Mineral Proficiencies of Tinkering

================================================================

Media theorists have been attempting to devise a conceptual language for an object that is collectively imagined before the conditions of its material possibility, from André Bazin's writings on the pre-cinematic myth of total cinema ("The concept men had of it existed so to speak fully armed in their minds, as if in some Platonic heaven, and what strikes us most of all is the obstinate resistance of matter to ideas") to Friedrich Kittler's description of occult traditions and late-eighteenth-century magic lantern shows as a "relay race from illusionists to engineers."[^ap32]  For his part, Gernsback was able so successfully to outline the material possibility of an invention before it existed thanks to his understanding of tinkering as a practice through which we might catch glimpses of the future.  While Thomas Edison would respond to Gernsback's question about the future in their interview (**Thomas Edison Speaks**), "You know, Mr. Gernsback, I am an inventor, and as such I do not concern myself overmuch with philosophical research," for Gernsback, invention was every bit a matter of this so-called "philosophy" of the future.

[^ap32]:  See @bazin_myth_2005, p. 17.  @kittler_optical_2010, p. 101.  @gunning_doing_2001.  @batchen_burning_1999.  In a similar vein, John Guillory writes that "this peculiar latency is characteristic of discourse about media from the sixteenth to the later nineteenth centuries. . . . The transposition of writing into print did not elicit at first a theoretical recognition of media as much as a reflection on the latency of print in the technology of writing itself. It was as though print were there, already, in the medium of writing. This is how Bacon understands print in the New Organon: 'the technique of printing certainly contains nothing which is not open and almost obvious.' Bacon explains that 'men went without this magnificent invention (which does so much for the spread of learning) for so many centuries' because they somehow failed to notice that letters and ink might be used for inscription with a different instrument than the pen, namely 'letter types' inked and pressed on paper, an ingenious form of endlessly reproducible writing."  @guillory_genesis_2010, 324.

Take for instance *Electrical Experimenter's* January 1916 "Wrinkles, Recipes, and Formulas" section.  Amid instructions for a homemade heliograph printing process, all the way down to a recipe for concocting the ink, there appears a curious piece by Gernsback that recommends the reader try biting a sewing needle tightly between his teeth while holding the sharp end to the groove of a phonograph record:

> With a little practise one will become proficient in moving the head at the same ratio of speed as the ordinary reproducer arm is moved from the outside of the record towards the inside. As soon as the needle touches the record with sufficient pressure, the inside of the head will be filled immediately with music exceedingly loud and clear. A curious result of the experiment is that a person standing near by can bear the music, the head acting as a reproducer in this case.  (**Hearing Through Your Teeth**)

The experiment may have seemed familiar to those who had just read the latest installment of Gernsback's *The Scientific Adventures of Baron Münchausen* earlier that issue, which introduced a very strange Martian technology known as the Tos Rod that allows Martians to hear "not with their ears. They were listening with their brains!"

> The two reddish plates pressing against the bare temples are made of two metals unknown on earth, and the metals are distributed over the surface of the plate in honeycomb fashion without touching each other. Now if the two plates are pressed against the temples and when wireless waves are passing through them, the waves are translated into vibrations of a certain frequency. It has been found that if these vibrations reach the conscious sense of hearing which is located in the *Temporal Lobe* of the brain, sounds can be impressed upon the brain without requiring the ear and its auditory nerve. In other words, the sound is "heard" directly within the brain without the agency of the ear's mechanism.

Martians in mind, the reader could now have a felt sense of the operative principle behind this alien technology thanks to the sewing needle experiment:  that the ear itself is not "absolutely essential for hearing."  This is just one of many examples of how, throughout the Gernsback magazines, tinkering with something as simple as available household materials became the starting point for new inventions, both functional and fictional.  Gernsback would eventually patent a device he called the Osophone seven years later, a "small, compact and handy instrument which can be easily carried about and used without attracting undue attention."  The Osophone employed the same principle as the *Electrical Experimental* editorial, this time with a finished mouthpiece attached to a wire that provided a "simple and practical means by which hearing may be effected by sound vibrations transmitted directly to the osseous tissue of the body."^[@gernsback_acoustic_1924.]  Projecting out from these available materials and describing their experience in the future was a means of aiding design practice.  And it was through the perspective of the future that Gernsback developed his tinkerer's ethic.

What did it mean to be a tinkerer in the early twentieth century?  The appellation was variable.  Gernsback himself used *tinkerer, experimenter,* and *amateur,* while Edison preferred *mucker.*^["'A mucker is an experimenter---a scientific experimenter. . . . Mr. Edison is a mucker himself.  He calls all experimenters muckers.'  It was explained that Mr. Edison had been president of a muckers club.  So there you are, muckers!"  @_edison_1916.]  Today, we might refer to people who take pride in their ability to build seemingly complex technologies from scratch as *makers.*  Not just a hobby, tinkering in the early twentieth century was a special form of intuition or creativity, a means of advancement for a self-educated working class, as well as a political position against the increasingly complex and unreliable consumer technologies produced by corporations like RCA and AT&T.  Throughout his editorials on technology understood in the older, Aristotelian sense of "a reasoned state of capacity to make," Gernsback argued that the incremental modification associated with a term like *tinkering* involved just as much creative expression, expertise, and skill as the whole cloth production of a new technology we might associate with *invention.*^[@_nicomachean_2009, 105.]

Across Europe, political circumstances in the wake of World War I led some amateur radio groups to become highly politicized, as was the case with the *Arbeiterradio-Bewegung* (Workers' Radio Movement) in Germany.  What began as "a loose association of amateurs who wanted to learn how to build their own apparatus so that they could transmit and receive radio messages themselves" soon grew into a radical movement operating in an environment of high unemployment and growing government repression.  Associated with this movement and its publications like *Der Neu Rundfunk* [New Radio], *Arbeiter-Funk* [Workers' Radio], and *Unser Sender* [Our Radio Station], were prominent artists and intellectuals such as Walter Benjamin, Bertolt Brecht, Paul Hindemeith, and Kurt Weill.  According to Siegfried Zielinski, 

> They began to criticise the programmes of established radio broadcasting and presented their own suggestions for organising the medium according to their interests, organised evenings for collective listening (particularly to Soviet radio stations), and protested about censorship of programmes.^[@zielinski_audiovisions:_1999, p. 126-7.]

While tinkering never evolved into a coherent political position in the United States, its practitioners nevertheless saw themselves as operating in opposition to the hoarding of intellectual property by corporate interests and advocates of freely sharing their knowledge and skills.  Forms of self-education during the period varied widely according to class.  While middle class Americans were now able to culturally enrich themselves during their leisure time through several new "great book" series geared toward mass audiences, like the Book of the Month Club and the Harvard Classics "Five Foot Shelf" collection, the urban working classes "were asked to invest their sense of self in hands-on technical knowledge," writes Eric Drown.  Commercial technical institutes and correspondence schools promised upward mobility and job security within a number of growing fields like automobile repair and electrical engineering, in addition to radio.^[@drown_usable_2001, p. 77-78.  @rubin_making_1992.]  Companies began selling products that allowed youths to learn electrical principles at home:

> Parents eager to set their children on the right path bought them chemistry sets with names like Chemcraft, produced by the Porter Chemical Company, which also sponsored Chemists Clubs.  Young adult books on electricity and technology flourished, many of them written for boys and intended to instill the noble desire to invent. . . . This was certainly a far cry from the genteel instruction on natural philosophy to promote polite drawing room conversation on scientific theory published just a few decades earlier.  It’s interesting to consider just what a young Michael Faraday would make of such a book or of *Harper’s Electricity Book for Boys* (1907) in which the author, Joseph H. Adams, wrote: "Theory is all very well, but there is nothing like mastering principles, and then applying them and working out results for one's self."^[@schlesinger_battery:_2011, p. 200-1.  Schlesinger points out that an amateur experimenter culture preceded Gernsback's magazines, noting in particular L. Frank Baum of *The Wizard of Oz* fame and his novel *The Master Key: An Electrical Fairy Tale* (1901), in which a young man sets out on "an electrical adventure with all manner of gadgets and gizmos that benefit mankind.  The book, as Baum noted in the preface, was "Founded Upon the Mysteries of Electricity and the Optimism of Its Devotees."]

This was the environment into which Gernsback introduced his editorials on the process by which "new things" come into the world, and the special forms of creativity that emerge when an amateur draws equally upon his familiarity with science and the arts to imagine a new technology.  In many ways, he was far ahead of his time in proposing several frameworks for understanding invention, even if they were underdeveloped.  It wouldn't be for many years that the social and historical study of technology would be accepted as a serious academic pursuit, as Aitken writes in the 1976 prologue to his magisterial, two-volume history of radio:

> If the 'new things' of science, technology, and economic life often seem overwhelming and uncontrollable, the reason may well be that we have, in modern societies, created highly efficient structures for the generation of new knowledge without seriously attending to the processes by which new knowledge is put to use. . . . historians of the future will find it strange that so few social scientists of the twentieth century could bring themselves, in their work, to treat science as one of the great social institutions of the time.^[@aitken_syntony_1976, 9.  Aitken is citing here @merton_priorities_1957.]

Though this is of course no longer the case, it's important to note here that the questions raised by Gernsback in a pulp publishing context wouldn't have sufficient answers even among academic historians and sociologists of technology for many decades to come.

Gernsback's views on these issues evolved over the years thanks in part to the debates, suggestions, and questions he and his staff printed in lively correspondence sections like The Oracle and Patent Advice.  Questions from readers ranged from the factual (how many feet come in a pound of No. 12 B.&S. triple-braided weather proof wire?) to the experimental (might two lead plates submerged in sulphuric acid make a good storage battery?).  It was important for knowledge to be freely shared among readers, contributors, and editors, since the construction of wireless sets involved many different forms of expertise.  "A radio set builder," wrote Gernsback in a 1925 editorial, "must be a carpenter, an electrician, a metal worker, a tinsmith, and a radio engineer, all rolled into one."^[@gernsback_radio_1925.]  Initially, Gernsback argued that such impressively skilled inventors were born, not made.  While many could learn to be "mechanical" inventors, or those "who are suddenly confronted with a certain device that to their minds seems imperfect, whereupon they will bend their energies towards improving the existing device," true inventors were hard to come by (**The Born and the Mechanical Inventor**).  In cultural studies of media and technology today, we might think of these two styles of invention as Gernsback formulates them---the whole cloth innovation of shiny new tools versus incremental acts of modification and repair---as reflections of a hemispheric divide.  Steven J. Jackson argues that "a Western and productivist imagination" biases much of media studies today, obscuring the vast majority of technological practices in the developing world:  "breakdown, maintenance, and repair constitute crucial but vastly understudied sites or moments within the worlds of new media and technology today."^[For more on "the distinctive repair ecologies of the developing world," see @jackson_rethinking_2014.]

Eventually, perhaps in response to the variety and number of designs sent in by amateurs over the years, Gernsback began to shift his views on invention so that they were more in line with the educational goals of his magazines.  In **Why The Radio Set Builder,** we begin to understand that the biggest contributions to this community of makers were not necessarily made by its most broadly educated members.  To the contrary, the most important things that an experimenter needed to know would emerge organically from the process of tinkering, in a dialogue between a person and an inanimate object.  Gernsback advocated making things by hand not just as a hobby, a means of diversion or release after the working day is over, but as a complete education in tools, materials, and techniques:

> If, for instance, you are making an elaborate radio console for your living room, you will get more information on the subject than you could possibly get from the best text-books.  You will, first of all, become familiar with the various tools necessary to fashion the wood, and if you own a woodworking lathe you will learn quite a good deal about the operation of wood-turning and the tools to be used for this particular purpose.  You will learn what it means to sandpaper, you will learn to recognize the different kinds of wood, and you will know the difference between green and kiln-dried variety of woods.  You will soon know how to use glue, and what kind.  You will study the various fillers, and, last but not least, you will get a thorough education in varnishes and paints, and the use of all of these.^[@gernsback_handicraft_1927]

For Gernsback, the know-how that emerges from making things is cascading: hands gradually feeling their way along an interlocking series of dependent skills and material properties.  As we see in **The Perversity of Things,** objects only ever seem like frustrating "obstacles" in the way of a good idea when we don't fully understand the proper affordances of those objects.  "It is not the things that are perverse, it is ourselves who make them seem perverse."  With enough experience, barriers and constraints begin to look like creative opportunities.  Gernsback refers to this capacity to see finished form in raw materials as a "knack" or an "intuition."  It's what allows one reader to build an audion tube from scratch, that ultimate symbol of inscrutable corporate complexity, by learning glassblowing.^[@reed_unterrified_1916.]  Or another to make the first ever permanent recording of a radio broadcast by modifying his phonograph player so that it could register the signals from his wireless set.^[@apgar_amateur_1915.]  The more experience an experimenter had with a wide variety of materials and techniques, the better attuned his intuition would become when it came to making new devices.

Today, the intense material specificity of the technologies as they were described to the readers of these magazines is highly impressive.  In Gernsback's writings, one is struck not only by the romance of communicating in private through secret codes and the intimacy of a headset, but also by the exotic materials that made this experience possible.  Pieces like **The Dynamophone** and **A Treatise on Wireless Telegraphy** address a readership with an already impressive material awareness of their apparatus, and introduce new possibilities each month to the wireless medium's construction and operation.  Thanks to these mineral proficiencies, a rural midwestern reader would know that news from New York may become audible if only he could find some molybdenite, or a supplier willing to ship him the nitric acid needed to try out a new electrolytic detector.^[For more on molybdenite and how amateurs used it, see **A Treatise on Wireless**.]  The sheer alchemy that went into the construction of these apparatuses---glass light bulbs filled with argon gas, impure silicon crudely fused into thin wafers, influential experiments conducted by an employee of AT&T with the contents of a "Minerals of Maine" souvenir box---makes the effects they were able to achieve seem all the more wonderful.^[The "Minerals of Maine" box included iron pyrite, galena, chalcopyrite, and magnetite.  See @douglas_crystal_1981; @thackeray_when_1983.]

Details such as these seem especially poignant in light of recent calls for a critical awareness of the rare earth minerals used in the production of today's increasingly complex digital devices, as well as the environmental toll of the electronic waste these devices leave behind once we inevitably acquiesce to their fragility by replacing them with the latest release.^[See especially @gabrys_digital_2011.]  In an article on the dust produced during the manufacture and disposal of hardware, Jussi Parikka writes of a "persistence that lingers across scales from minerals and chemical elements to the lungs and organic tissue."^[@parikka_dust_2013.]  Timothy Morton refers to these persistent objects, often produced and disposed of under appalling working conditions in China and countries across Africa, as "hyperobjects":  manufactured materials or devices that "do not rot in our lifetimes.  They do not burn without . . . releasing radiation, dioxins, and so on."^[@morton_ecological_2012, p. 130.]  That gadgets like smartphones and tablets today are described as "magical" or like "touching the future" should come as no surprise.^[Lori Emerson writes on the rhetoric of magic as it is applied to contemporary screen interfaces in -@emerson_reading_2014, pp. 1-46.]  Not only are they black boxes that with every passing year become increasingly difficult to modify, repair, or tinker with, they are blissfully disconnected from the labor practices and material conditions that go into producing them.  We encounter a very different kind of moment through Gernsback's writings.  Of course the advent of wireless was pure magic:  it allowed people to skim disembodied voices from the air.  But wireless was magical to Gernsback's readers not because they didn't understand how the trick worked, but because they did.  That elemental, raw materials could produce such effects was absolutely fantastic, and provided an endless source of fascination.